a
Germany, France, Italy and Spain became the latest countries to suspend use of the vaccine even as a third wave of the pandemic threatens the continent.

ROME — As a third wave of the pandemic crashes over Europe, questions about the safety of one of the continent’s most commonly available vaccines led Germany, France, Italy and Spain to temporarily halt its use on Monday. The suspensions created further chaos in inoculation rollouts even as new coronavirus variants continue to spread.

The decisions followed reports that a handful of people who had received the vaccine, made by AstraZeneca, had developed fatal brain hemorrhages and blood clots.

The company has strongly defended its vaccine, saying that there is “no evidence” of increased risk of blood clots or hemorrhages among the more than 17 million people who have received the shot in the European Union and the United Kingdom.

“The safety of all is our first priority,” AstraZeneca said in a statement Monday. “We are working with national health authorities and European officials and look forward to their assessment later this week.”

The timing of the pause in inoculations by some of Europe’s largest countries — which followed a flurry of similar actions by Denmark, Norway and several others — could not have been worse.

Thanks for reading The Times.
Subscribe to The Times
Europe’s vaccine rollouts already lag far behind those in Britain and the United States, and there is dawning realization that much of the continent is suffering a third wave of infections. Leading immunologists fretted on Monday that the decision by several of Europe’s leading nations to suspend the use of AstraZeneca would make vaccination efforts even harder by emboldening vaccine skeptics in countries where they are particularly entrenched.

The European Medicines Agency and the World Health Organization warned against an exodus from vaccines that would undermine rollout efforts at a pivotal moment.

“We do not want people to panic,” the W.H.O.’s chief scientist, Soumya Swaminathan, said at a news conference, adding that no link had been found between the clotting disorders reported in some countries and Covid-19 shots. A W.H.O. advisory committee plans to meet on Tuesday to discuss the vaccine.

The European Medicines Agency, or E.M.A., said Monday that it would continue to investigate a possible connection between the AstraZeneca shots and blood clots or bleeding in the brain. But the agency said the numbers of such problems reported in vaccinated people did not seem higher than those usually seen in the general population. Germany, for instance, reported seven cases of a “rare cerebral vein thrombosis” out of 1.6 million people who received the vaccine there.


ImageThe entrance to a rapid testing site at a former dance club in Munich.
The entrance to a rapid testing site at a former dance club in Munich.Credit...Laetitia Vancon for The New York Times

Image
Health workers providing free testing for German citizens.
Health workers providing free testing for German citizens.Credit...Laetitia Vancon for The New York Times
“While its investigation is ongoing, E.M.A. currently remains of the view that the benefits of the AstraZeneca vaccine in preventing Covid-19, with its associated risk of hospitalization and death, outweigh the risks of side effects,” the agency said.


Should You Be Concerned About Blood Clots, Bleeding and the AZ-Vaccine?
March 15, 2021
The European Union bet heavily on AstraZeneca, a British-Swedish company, last year.

In France, where AstraZeneca is being relied on to accelerate the country’s vaccination campaign, and where top officials had urged people to trust the vaccine only days ago, President Emmanuel Macron called the suspension a “precaution” and expressed “hope of quickly picking them up again.”

YOUR CORONAVIRUS TRACKER: We'll send you the latest data for places you care about each day.
Sign Up
In Italy, the police on Monday began seizing nearly 400,000 doses of AstraZeneca vaccine on the orders of local prosecutors investigating the death of a teacher who had received the vaccine. The Italian Medicines Agency said in a statement that the suspension of the vaccine, among the most commonly distributed in the country, was “precautionary and temporary.” Its director, Nicola Magrini, said on television Monday night that “there is no reason to instill doubts at this moment and to lead people to prefer one vaccine over another.”

Editors’ Picks

Nobody Wants Cancer. But a ‘Big C’ Label Has Surprising Upsides.

How the N.C.A.A. Hopes to Pull Off the Tournament

How the Dead Hand of Imperialism Continues to Influence World Politics
Continue reading the main story
“We are confident that after the investigation by the E.M.A. we can pick it up,” said Cesare Buquicchio, a spokesman for Italy’s health minister.


Image
A cafe in Milan, where bars and restaurants can serve only takeout food.
A cafe in Milan, where bars and restaurants can serve only takeout food.Credit...Alessandro Grassani for The New York Times

Image
On the tram in Milan, passengers must space themselves out. 
On the tram in Milan, passengers must space themselves out. Credit...Alessandro Grassani for The New York Times
In Germany, which had previously supported the vaccine despite other countries’ concerns, the health minister, Jens Spahn, called the decision to pause shots “a purely precautionary measure.” More than 1.6 million doses of AstraZeneca have been administered in Germany, which has relied heavily on the BioNTech-Pfizer vaccine.

But the country’s Paul Ehrlich Institute said the country decided to suspend AstraZeneca shots because cases of a “rare cerebral vein thrombosis” had been reported in the country following vaccinations.

Mr. Spahn acknowledged the seven cases of thrombosis made it very rare, but he defended the decision to pause shots as necessary to ensure trust in the vaccine moving ahead.

“For nearly everybody there is no risk, but a connection cannot be fully ruled out,” Mr. Spahn said. “That is why we decided to make this decision.”

Spain followed suit Monday night. At news conference, Carolina Darias, Spain’s health minister, said she had been in touch with European counterparts before ordering a two-week suspension of the vaccine. That should give time for the relevant medical agencies “to offer responses” about the cases of thrombosis recently detected, she said.

Throughout Europe, officials and immunologists worried that the actions would cost vital time in the race against fast-spreading variants.

The Coronavirus Outbreak ›
Latest Updates
Updated 
March 16, 2021, 5:45 a.m. ET15 minutes ago
15 minutes ago
As Europe suspends AstraZeneca shots, other countries move ahead with them.
A pharmacist had vaccine doses to spare, so he hit the road.
A pause on AstraZeneca’s vaccine comes as Europe confronts a third wave of infections.
“This is a catastrophe,” said Heike Werner, the minister for health in the eastern German state of Thuringia, who was already grappling with learning that her region would receive just 9,600 of 31,200 doses of AstraZeneca because of a reported shortage of supplies. “Many people are desperately waiting for this vaccine.”

Roberto Burioni, a leading Italian virologist, voiced his worries on Twitter that people would now avoid the vaccine.

“I understand if you will decide not to get vaccinated, scared by inexplicable decisions,” he said. “I understand and I am sorry because you will expose yourself to a serious risk to avoid a negligible one.”

Dr. Michael Head, senior research fellow in global health, University of Southampton said “the decisions by France, Germany and other countries look baffling.” He said that the delay in inoculations, and “the potential for increased vaccine hesitancy,” belied any new or conclusive data.


Image
